---
layout: post
title: 'AWS + IR + U Part 2'
date: 2019-03-31
categories: aws,ir
---

# Overview

In the last post, we covered the preparation phase of incident response. Although it seemed like these are all things we should do before responding to an incident, sometimes we do not have the luxury of setting up a greenfield operation. Sometimes we are only wise to these items after an incident has occurred. 

The point of this is that incident response is an iterative process, and that rings the most true during the identification phase. I brought up the Blue Team Handbook: Incident Response Edition in the last post, and I am going to bring it up again here because it is such a great resource for this topic. One thing that the book drives home during this phase is the Observe, Orient, Decide, Act (OODA) loop. This terminology comes from the military but applied to information security just as well. 

During the identification phase of an incident, we have to collect information, triage it, analyze it, and then move on to the next phases. We might find information during our analysis that brings us right back to the information collection portion of identification, hence the OODA loop. Let’s say we have observed new information, such as an IP address, now we must orient our analysis and then decide if this information is relevant to the investigation. After we’ve made that decision, we can act on that. 

The primary objectives of this phase are to find the scoping of the incident in order to see what we have to contain - which when it comes to AWS, could mean rough waters ahead. We’re going to cover some tools that allow you to detect and scope incidents. 

Note that this isn’t a comprehensive list, and other solutions may exist. We live to learn. Reach out to us on Twitter if you have some solutions that you like as well. 

# AWS-Native 

## GuardDuty 

If you’re unfamiliar, GuardDuty is a service offered by AWS that fills the gap of an IDS/IPS in their security model. 

GuardDuty works by monitoring your VPC flow, DNS query and CloudTrail logs in order to determine if there is any suspicious or malicious activity ongoing. It does this by alerting you for suspicious CloudTrail calls or traffic that matches the swatch of threat intelligence lists that it compares the information it can see against. You also have the ability to create your own custom threat intelligence lists for the service to consume. 

 GuardDuty is straight forward to set up:
1. Add the following to an IAM role (or group, or user):
```{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "guardduty:*"
            ],
            "Resource": "*"
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "iam:CreateServiceLinkedRole"
            ],
            "Resource": "arn:aws:iam::123456789123:role/aws-service-role/guardduty.amazonaws.com/AWSServiceRoleForAmazonGuardDuty",
            "Condition": {
                "StringLike": {
                    "iam:AWSServiceName": "guardduty.amazonaws.com"
                }
            }
        }

    ]
}
```

This will allow whatever you apply it to the ability to enable GuardDuty

2. From the console, go to the GuardDuty page and click on ‘Get Started’.
3. Click on ‘Enable GuardDuty’. A service role will be created if it does not exist in the account. You can read more about it in the Amazon docs but essentially it is just used by GD to read the information it needs. 
4. You’re done!

The fun part about GuardDuty is that it has to be enabled in each region that you want to use it (which should be all regions). So you either have to do steps 2 through 4 above, or if you prefer the CLI, the awscli has ‘aws guardduty create-detector --enable --region xyz’ that you could easily script for each region as well.

This post isn’t a deep dive on how to use GuardDuty, but so you have an idea of what it can alert on, [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/guardduty/latest/ug/guardduty_finding-types-active.html) is a list of current alerts (this will be updated when they add new items).




## CloudWatch Events

CloudTrail logs can be delayed by up to 15mins. CloudTrail logs can also be sent to CloudWatch. Information about our other services within AWS is stored in CloudWatch. It then makes sense to use CloudWatch Events in order to alert us when something is happening in our environment.

CloudWatch Events cover many of the core services within AWS, but to see how the events apply to the services you use, check out the Amazon documentation on the services [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/events/EventTypes.html)

You can also see here what the different events look like when they are triggered in your account.  

CloudWatch Insights is a fairly recent offering that will allow you to more efficiently sort through the data returned by CloudWatch. It allows you to query and visualize data that you’re collecting. Although we have not used it as of this writing, it seems like a useful tool that could be turned into a component of an identification platform though dashboard creation or the use of CloudWatch. 

So how do we use CloudWatch events? Let’s walk through an example of how to use it in conjunction with CloudTrail. Here’s how to build an alert when an MFA device is deactivated:

1. Log in to your AWS account and find the CloudWatch console
2. On the left-hand side, choose Events → Rules
3. Create a new rule
4. Choose `Event Pattern`, and select IAM as the `Service Name`. If you wanted to use other services, such as CloudTrail or GuardDuty, this is the place to do that as well.
5. Choose `AWS API Call via CloudTrail` as the event type, and enter `DeactivateMFADevice` as the specific entry. You can see that we have the ability to choose all events or specify multiple.
6. Choose the target. For this example, I will choose a SNS topic that I’ve already created (with default settings). I am choosing to send the whole matched event.
7. Click `Configure details`.
8. Name your rule and ensure that it’s set to `Enabled`.

That’s it!

You can see the freedom that you have to alert on whatever you’d like (as long as it flows through CloudTrail). Here are some examples of things that we can look for:


| Alert if...                             | Using...                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Because...                                                                                                                                                                       |
| --------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Specific S3 bucket List/Get operation   | {"source": ["aws.s3"],"detail-type": ["AWS API Call via CloudTrail"],"detail": {"eventSource": ["s3.amazonaws.com"],"eventName": ["ListObjects"],"requestParameters": {"bucketName": ["honey-bucket"]}}}                                                                                                                    | This is a honeybucket, and no one should be listing this unless they are attempting recon activities.                                                                            |
| EC2 instances terminated                | {"source": ["aws.ec2"],"detail-type": ["EC2 Instance State-change Notification"],"detail": {"state": ["terminated"]}}                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Correlating these with our infrastructure pipeline logs will alert us when rogue activity may be occuring.                                                                       |
| Account permissions changed*            | {"source": ["aws.iam"],"detail-type": ["AWS API Call via CloudTrail"],"detail": {"eventSource": ["iam.amazonaws.com"],"eventName": ["UpdateGroup","UpdateAssumeRolePolicy","UpdateRole","UpdateUser","AttachGroupPolicy","AttachRolePolicy","AttachUserPolicy",“DeleteUserPolicy",“DeleteRolePolicy",“DeleteGroupPolicy"]}} | Alert us if there are changes to users. Depending on your use case, this may generate false positives, but this also may assist you with finding unauthorized changes.           |
| Account/keys added*                     | {"source": ["aws.iam"],"detail-type": ["AWS API Call via CloudTrail"],"detail": {"eventSource": ["iam.amazonaws.com"],"eventName": ["CreateAccessKey","UpdateAccessKey","DeleteAccessKey"]}}                                                                                                                                | This can be used to detect unauthorized key updating/rogue activity.                                                                                                             |
| GuardDuty Medium or High Severity Alert | {"source": ["aws.guardduty"],"detail-type": ["GuardDuty Finding"],"detail": {"severity": [5,8]}}                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | This will alert us when there are notifications we should action. The rest can be pushed to our SIEM or investigated as they come up, but we should know about these right away. |

*IAM-related events can only utilize resources (e.g. Trails and targets) in us-east-1.

This can even be further improved with the addition of using the CloudWatch agent and logging what is happening on your servers by shipping your OS logs to CloudWatch. More information can be found in [this](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/cloudwatch-log-service/) Amazon blog post by Jeff Barr. 

Since we’re in this space it’s important to remember that someone can also disable these services just as you’ve enabled them. Amazon created CloudTrail Event History for you to help monitor for this exact thing. This is a service that is enabled by default and stores up to 90 days worth of activity about your account. We’d recommend taking this log source and placing it in your centralized log management system. 
Before we move on, remember that instead of notifications, you can use the target service of CloudWatch Events to take actions via Lambda or SSM as well. Here’s a great [blog post](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/security/how-to-use-amazon-guardduty-and-aws-web-application-firewall-to-automatically-block-suspicious-hosts/) by Amazon outlining how to do that.

## TrustedAdvisor

AWS TrustedAdvisor is a service that you obtain after becoming a Business or Enterprise support customer from Amazon. While you do get access to it before then (e.g. a Basic or Developer support plan), Business and Enterprise support get access to all checks rather than 7. 

You can see here what this service looks for, and while it’s goal isn’t primarily security, it can help you identify issues or points of weakness in your account. It will highlight things such as weak EC2 security groups, overly-permissive S3 buckets, and even resource consumption on each. 

Keep in mind that this is a point-in-time scan and no active monitoring, but if you’ve just inherited an AWS account, using Trusted Advisor isn’t a bad start to get a lay of the land. With that being said, we find it cumbersome to use as it generates an obtuse spreadsheet for you to comb through. 


# Open-Source

## Scout2/ScoutSuite

Scout2 (now known as ‘ScoutSuite’) is a tool developed by the NCC Group that aims to be a security centric point-in-time scan. It checks for common misconfigurations among popular AWS services including EC2, VPC, RDS, S3, and beyond.

It’s a tool that works by you generating a pair of keys for it to use (with read-only access) and then running the script. Once it runs, you will get an HTML report that is a little easier to digest than Trusted Advisor. 

More information on usage and what it’s checking can be found in the project’s [GitHub repo](https://github.com/nccgroup/ScoutSuite). 

We here at IcedSec highly recommend Scout2.

## SecurityMonkey

Netflix. Is there anything they don’t do? SecurityMonkey is an open-source offering of theirs that is an ongoing monitoring tool which has the ability to monitor your AWS account for misconfigurations and policy changes. 

Security Monkey is set up on multiple EC2 instances and offers a nice web UI for you and your team to browse through its findings.

It requires a little more setup, but the fact that it tracks historical account changes that it detects can make a large difference in your monitoring or incident investigations. More information and an install guide can be found at the repo.


# Conclusion

We hope this post gave you some ideas on detection mechanisms to happen within your AWS environment. 

Keep in mind this is just based on experience of the authors and is not meant to be an exhaustive list. The authors also have experience with shipping items from GuardDuty or CloudTrail to ELK stacks and performing their alerting there. 

The best solution is the one that works for you. 
